JUDY WOODRUFF: As Republicans
in Congress struggle to reach
agreement on a plan to replace
the Affordable Care Act, we
have heard from a variety of
interested parties in recent
weeks and months.
They have included
hospitals, the pharmaceutical
industry, advocates for
the homeless and those
with disabilities, as
well as lawmakers from
both political parties.
Tonight, we turn to the
March of Dimes and its
president, Stacey Stewart.
It's a nonprofit that focuses
on the health needs of mothers
and babies, especially with
regard to preventing
premature birth, birth
defects and infant mortality.
Stacey Stewart, thank you
very much for being here.
So, what is your main concern
with the Senate version of
this health care reform plan?
STACEY STEWART, President,
March of Dimes: Well, the March
of Dimes, as you mentioned,
what we care about is
the health of pregnant
women and their babies.
And our main concern with the
Senate bill, as it's proposed,
is that it would put at
risk the health of many of
those women and their babies.
Medicaid today covers about half
of all pregnancies in the United
States and there are about 30
million children that
are covered by Medicaid.
Under what the Senate
has proposed, about
6.5 million low-income
women of child-bearing
age would lose their
coverage under Medicaid.
And we think that that puts
at risk those women in terms
of them being able to access
prenatal care and all the
things they need to do to have
a healthy baby, have a healthy
pregnancy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, about half
of pregnant women in this
country depend on government
help in order to have
a healthy pregnancy?
STACEY STEWART: Right.
So, what Medicaid covers
is -- it generally covers
a lot of low-income
women who are pregnant
and making sure they have the
help they need in prenatal
care and also in delivering the
baby.
But what it also covers, and
what a lot of people don't
understand, is that, if a baby
is born too soon, born
premature, if a baby
is born with low birth
weight or a baby has
defects, Medicaid also covers
many of those babies as well.
So it ends up covering a lot
of the babies and providing
the support that many women
and families need to
make sure they can have
a healthy pregnancy and
have the support that
babies need if there
are complications.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I think there
hasn't been a great deal of
talk about prevention, but you
were telling us that
prevention is a very -
- is a big part of this.
STACEY STEWART: Well, I think
one of the big conversations
that is going on right now is,
how do we stabilize
the health market?
And I think -- how do
we stabilize Medicaid
and I think stabilize
health care in general?
And I think one of the
conversations we really
need to have as a country
is, how do we begin
to do even more, to put more
of the emphasis on prevention
and care earlier on, vs. having
a system that really is
funding a lot of chronic
disease and illness?
So, one of the reasons we focus
so much on maternity coverage
and prenatal care is because
that's what happens to
enable those women to
have healthy babies.
If they get the help they
need, and certainly even before
they get pregnant, if they are
healthy before they even get
pregnant, that is going to be
what creates the best outcome
for that baby.
And so healthy women
equals healthy babies.
The more and more we
can put more emphasis
on early prevention
efforts and fund a system
that actually focuses on that,
we think will improve health
outcomes, reduce cost, reduce
premiums, which is what
I think everybody wants.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Isn't it
the case, though, Stacey
Stewart, that, under
traditional Medicaid,
states are required to cover
pregnancy, to cover prenatal
care, to cover babies?
So, even if Medicaid is scaled
back, which looks like would
be the case under the Senate
plan, the Republican plan, they
would still be required to cover
women in these circumstances,
wouldn't they?
STACEY STEWART: Well,
the problem is, is
that with reductions as
they're proposed, we're
not exactly sure if -- how much
of the need would be covered.
That's always a question.
And with women coming off of
Medicaid coverage as a result
of the pullback of the expansion
of Medicaid, I think there is
a real concern that we have.
And, of course, the
concern isn't just in
the Medicaid market.
The concern is also
in the private market.
So, what a lot of people
don't realize is, before
the Affordable Care
Act, private health
care plans didn't necessarily
include maternity coverage
as a requirement, as
did employer-based
plans or Medicaid.
And so we have got to look
at the totality of the health
care system in making sure that
all women, irrespective of
them being in a private plan or
Medicaid, have access to those
resources they need.
And we believe that much
of the support that women
need could be at risk.
And that's what our
primary concern is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you answer
the argument from conservatives
that, look, something has
got to be done, that Medicaid
has grown at a rate that's
just out of control, cannot
be sustained, and unless some
methods are found to scale
that back, Medicaid is not
going to be there in the long
term for people who need it?
STACEY STEWART: Well,
we share that concern.
Obviously, the costs of
Medicaid are exorbitant
and they're growing.
But let's look at what's really
going on in the Medicaid market.
You have got a lot of low-income
women, many women of color.
And what we see are health
outcomes not improving.
One of the big concerns that
we have at the March of Dimes
is we just -- the government
just issued some statistics
showing that pre-term
birth rates have now
increased for the second
time in the past two years,
after some decline over
the past seven years.
Health outcomes are not
improving for pregnant
mothers and babies.
It's actually going down.
And so, one of the things that
we can do to control the costs
of Medicaid and health care
in general, again, is to focus
on what all early interventions
can be put in place, what
prevention methods could be
put in place to educate and
inform and provide the support
and the health care coverage
that women need, so that both
kind of health outcomes can be
avoided.
If we can avoid those health
outcomes, then we can avoid the
cost in the system, and then
we can keep those costs under
control, so that we have a
much more manageable system
over time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We have heard
on occasion from Republicans
the argument, why should men,
especially single men, be
required to buy - - to have
coverage that includes maternity
and birth costs?
STACEY STEWART: Well, that
argument just goes against
what insurance is all about.
We all buy insurance
for things we -- that
may never happen to us.
We all buy insurance for a lot
of things, including health
insurance for health outcomes
that we may never suffer from.
And the fact that women
are responsible for
child-bearing does not mean
that they're responsible
for creating the baby in the
first place by themselves.
It takes men and women
together to create babies.
And so we believe it's very
important that the insurance
market cover those things that
are risks that each one of us
individually may not experience,
but they are risks and
there are costs that are in
the system that are important
to make sure get covered.
So I think it's really important
to say, look, when we buy
insurance, we buy it for a lot
of things that we personally may
not experience or be impacted
by, but that's the point of
having insurance and that's the
point of having a larger pool
of risk included in insurance,
so that it reduces the cost
for everyone to participate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stacey Stewart,
the president of the March
of Dimes, and the debate goes
on.
Thank you.
STACEY STEWART: Thank
you so much, Judy.